This video is brought to you by Squarespace, from websites and online stores,
to marketing tools and analytics.
Squarespaces the all in one platform to build a beautiful online presence and
run your business.
Check out Squarespace through the Lincoln description below more about them in a
bit.
When we think of Sweden today, we think of them as a peaceful nation.
They haven't been involved in a war,
either external or internal for over 200 years, even longer than Switzerland.
It's hard to believe when looking at modern Sweden,
that this nation used to be the seat of a mighty empire possessing.
One of the most advanced armies in Europe,
Sweden in the 17th century was a country to be feared.
The reason Sweden rose from small Scandinavian kingdom to might embark and be
personified in the only king of Sweden to earn the avatar.
The great Gustavos ALS was a teenager when he ascended to the throne of a
country, embroiled in religious and diagnostic turmoil.
Over the course of 20 years,
I revolutionized the nation transforming the government from a medieval Relic to
a more modern bureaucracy,
but his most lasting contribute was in the field of warfare.
He modernized the Swedish army and built it into a sledgehammer with Gustavos Al
the first modern general at its head.
He became known as the defender of Protestantism when he brought his army to
continental Europe in the midst of the wars of religion,
changing the course of history and the process
Gustava was born on the 19th of December, 1594, the son of duke, Charles,
the brother of king, John II of Sweden.
John had died in 1592 leaving the throne to his son Siman who was already king
of Poland.
This caused friction because Siman was a devout Roman Catholic Sweden had been a
majority Protestant come over 65 years by this point.
And the ability was therefore that a Catholic king would suppress their religion
as it happened elsewhere in Europe,
Siman was interested in more than religious affairs of his new realm.
However, he wanted to fully integrate the separate kingdoms of Poland,
Lithuania and Sweden into one combined diagnostic kingdom centered on Warsaw
duke Charles, the Kings Oland,
devout Calvinist posed these moves and decided to act to assume the reigns of
power for himself.
The dispute flared into a civil war in 1598 and by 1600 Charles
Atman packing back to Poland in disgrace, he was deposed as king of Sweden,
and Charles was crowned as Charles the ninth making Gustavus ALS the new air.
The throne Charles is were rain was marked by almost constant warfare with
Denmark, with Russia,
with Polands where Singerman viewed Charles as a USPA and spent years trying to
regain his inheritance. Gustava Alph has inherited all of these conflicts.
When his father died in 16, 11 age, only 17,
the new king found himself opposed by three wealthier and more powerful nations
that completely surrounded country. If Sweden was to survive,
Gustavos needed to reform and modernize his army.
In the middle ages, the nations of Europe did not have standing armies.
They were considered too expensive in times of war.
The bulk of the army was made up of conscripted peasants who were given little
training. And we usually poorly arms.
The only professional soldiers were the Knight wealthy members of the ability
who could afford the expensive armor and arms needed.
But warfare was changing the Dawn of the 17th century.
The muskets was becoming an in part of infantry units rendering the night class
obsolete a new military organization was needed.
What the king came up with was an entirely new model of bureaucratic governance.
Giving the church responsibility for maintaining a conscription registry from
now on local church,
parishes would be required to keep a roster of physically fit.
Then between the ages of 16 and 60,
that could be called for service were needed.
Not only was this more efficient since everyone went to church and thus
churchman knew their congregation well,
but it also instilled a religious further into military service.
Now volunteering in time of war was not a civic duty,
but a responsibility for good Christians as well.
This description registry was used to create a system where each Swedish
province had the ability to raise a provincial regiment of soldiers.
Four of these regimens were to be kept on active duty at all times within the
Swedish Homeland and two in Swedish territory in Finland,
giving the king a permanent standing army of around 20,000 men with the ability
to call up the remaining regimens as reserves when needed training for the
troops were standardized across the country and inactive reservists were
required to keep their weapons in fighting edition. At all times,
Gustavo's reforms went beyond military organization though.
He also revolutionized the tactics of his army.
He recognized the growing power of the musket and the cannon noting that they
were great equalizing forces,
a small army with superior fire power could defeat a large army.
The Swedish army would invest heavily in artillery, but they ran into a problem.
Typical for the period. Most,
most cannon barrels were made out of either cast iron or bronze,
and they were extremely heavy,
too heavy to be easily moved around of battlefield.
And Army's artillery was usually placed on a hill at the start of the battle and
remains there for the entire engagement.
This greatly limited their effectiveness. What the king wanted was lighter,
mobile artillery pieces that could be more easily moved around the field battle
to provide far support as needed.
This would give his army a great advantage on the battlefield,
but it required a completely new design in order to work.
What the Swedish engineers originally came up with was the leather cannon.
A barrel made out of a thin copper tube, surrounded by tightly wound,
rope chords, and topped with leather.
This weapon was lightweight only requiring two men to pull it round and operate
it, but in practice,
the weapons didn't last very long under fire before the barrels burst from the
heat injuring or killing the gunner,
a more practical design was produced essentially a miniature version of existing
bronze cannons that could be towed either by a single horse or three men yet
still provided a rate of fire 50% faster than the muskets of the peer period.
Gustava Alfas now had his mobile fire support weapon and developed a new set of
tactics to incorporate all the separate pieces of his army into one cohesive
unit.
The Swedish king is considered one of the first modern generals to utilize this
combined arms style of warfare, which is still practiced even today.
And the king would soon have a need for his new army because there was trouble
brewing in Europe,
trouble threatened to send the entire continent up in flames.
Okay, so we've got a holy war brewing in Europe. Fantastic.
And we'll get into that in just a moment,
but first here's a quick word from today's sponsor Squarespace.
Now more than ever, people are getting creative with their time.
They're reaching deep into their savings account to start a new business of some
kind or maybe launch a blog or a website.
The world really is yours with Squarespace,
which is the perfect platform to help you fashion the internet into whatever you
want it to be.
It's the platform to use when you're ready to get started on that next web
project that you've been thinking about. You're looking to get in and out quick,
without thinking too much about what your website should look like. Well,
absolutely use one of their beautiful templates to make a website that's fresh.
And for you like it's right outta the box,
or maybe you are more of a hands on person,
you've got lots of opinions and ideas about what exactly your site should look
like. Well,
Squarespace gives you all of the customization options you could ever want with
no updates, no patches, no technical BS to worry about.
Once you're done setting up your website, tinkering with the design,
if you are so inclined or maybe just playing around with the colors,
there's so many extra features that Squarespace provides so that your site can
thrive. Email campaigns, patronage, portals, social integrations, member,
only areas, analytics, commercial options,
24 7 customer support everything you need in one place.
So when you are ready to get started on the next project of yours, big or small,
if it involves a website, it's gotta be with Squarespace right now,
you can go to squarespace.com for a free trial.
And when you're ready to launch your site, go to squarespace.com/biographics.
And you also save 10% of first purchase of a website or a domain.
And let's get back to the Swedes.
In 1521, Martin Luther was excommunicated by Pope Leo,
the 10th after refusing to renounce his writings,
that condemned what Luther calls,
the abuses and excesses of the cash church Luther's writings quickly
spread across Europe.
Thanks to the recently invented printing press and a permanent schism developed
between Catholics and the new Protestant faith,
religious belief mixed with politics as heads of states chose sides,
England Sweden,
and the Dutch public became majority Protestant countries while France, Spain,
and the Italian states remains majority ethic where things got complicated was
in the holy Roman, em empire of central Europe. The country,
we now know as Germany existed in the 17th century as a loose Confederation of
over 1,800 separate states and municipalities known as the holy Roman em empire,
while each territory answered to the emperor,
they also had a great deal of autonomy within their own borders.
Protestant reformation started in the German states and it deeply divided an
already divided country. After years of inter sine warfare,
the piece of Augsburg signed in 1555 established the principle of curious Regio,
religion whose realm their religion, which meant that whatever the religion,
the ruler of particular territory followed would decide what that territory's
official religion would be.
There were problems with the system from the start diagnostic struggles became
even more vicious as Catholic and Protestant,
as for each other over the bright to rule it also encouraged rulers in Catholic
territories,
they and occupy Protestant ones and vice versa in order to convert the
occupants.
Things only got worse when Archduke Thurd and end of Austria became the air to
the Habsburg family dynasty,
making him the leading contender to be the next Tori emperor Thur and end was an
extremely odd and Catholic.
He once was quoted as saying he would rather his lands be destroyed than
tolerate Hery for a all day tensions between Catholics and Protestants in
Germany finally broke in 16, 18 in Bohemia,
a meeting in PR castle between Protestant nobleman and Catholic representatives
of third announced violence.
When the Catholics were thrown out a third story window,
all the men survived the fall,
but what became known as the ESTs of Prague triggered civil war,
or at least its star started off that way.
The Harburg of Austria were closely aligned with their cousins,
the Hapsburgs of Spain and the Spanish sent troops to support their ally that
brought in the forces of the Dutch Republic,
the sworn enemies of Spain on the side of the Protestants, England and France,
who didn't like each other,
but disliked the Hapsburgs even more agreed to give money to anyone who would
fight against them in 16,
20 I've Denmark intervened on behalf of the Protestants.
But several years of war proved ineffective and the Danish tapped out after
their resources were exhausted card Ando,
the most powerful advisor to the king of France and the chief architect of the
Alliance against the Habsburgs sought a new champion Gustavos OLS and the
SWES
Gustav ALS was known as a Marshall king from the very beginning.
He ended the wars.
He inherited from his father with Denmark and Russia within a few years of
becoming king on favorable terms,
but he was still involved in a protracted struggle with Poland.
If he wanted to fully invest his country's resources into a fight with the holy
re Emper, he needed to find a way to extricate himself from that conflict.
Cardinal Richo intervened arranging for the two sides to sign the truths of ALS
mark in 1629, ending the war. Now,
Sweden could intervene in the chaos going on in Germany.
Gustavos wanted to help his fellow Protestants,
but his motives weren't entirely altruistic.
This Swedish king saw an opportunity to enhance his country's prestige
positioning himself as the defender of the Protestant faith.
He also hoped to make territorial gain in continental Europe on the 4th of July
16, 30, Gustav OVS landed at pen moons in Pomerania I,
the head of an army of 13,000 men,
he was facing a much larger army commanded by one of the M for his best
generals, Johan CIS.
The count of Tilly Tilly was an experienced and feared commander with many
victories over Protestant armies to supplement his own forces.
GAVS wanted to recruit allies from the German states,
but the Germans were distrustful of the Swedish King's intentions and were
unimpressed with his military credentials,
especially compared to the Catholic general for months,
the Swedish army was stuck in the little corner of Pomerania surrounded by
Imperial health garrisons.
The Catholic saw Gustava dolphins is nothing more than a minor, an annoyance.
So they left him alone. While the main Imperial army is fought in Italy,
but the STAM mate couldn't last forever. And at the start of 1631,
both sides made their move.
The Swedish army advanced south on the city of FRA capturing the town.
After a short siege,
Gustav's hoped to convince the Protestant states to join him in a show of force.
So-called rough wing. Meanwhile,
the main Imperial army under the count of till March north to Magnum Burg,
one of the SWS allies and sacked the town slaughtering and estimated 20,000
inhabitants, a dreadful show of force of his own,
both armies marched towards each other,
separated by the electorate of sax and me,
which had as yet been untouched by the war and wanted to remain neutral.
After weeks of negotiations, ly forced the issue by invading Saxony,
forcing the Saxons to rely themselves with the Swedes for their own.
Self-preservation the two armies ran into each other on the 7th of September,
1631 at the village of Brighton felt close to the city of Lipsig.
The battle began at midday with an exchange of the Swedish guns quickly proved
their superior skill managing to fire off three to five Vols for everyone that
the Imperials fired after the Imperial cavalry was rebuffed with heavy losses
til he ordered his powerful infantry to attack the Saxon forces posted on the
left flank of the allied line, routing them from the field.
But the attackers strung out the Imperial forces in a disorganized line.
One that the discipline Swedish troops moved to exploit.
They surrounded the Imperials and annihilated the entire army.
It was a complete tribe for Gustavos till his army sustained 27,000
casualties. Over 75% of the original force.
The destruction of the Imperial army was a huge morale boost for the Protestant.
Cause for the first time, since the war began,
they had a strategic initiative over their Catholic opponents.
The Swedish King's victory was the talk of Europe and the German princes,
which have been reluctant to align themselves with Gustavos before brighten
fell, Hanover has castle and Brandenburg pressure among others.
Now flocked to its banner.
The French agreed to pay even greater subsidies for Sweden's army and
reinforcement were pouring into the camp. It was I'm the Gustavus to go on.
The offensive
Armies of this period did not fight in the winter.
So the war was paused soon after the battle of bright and fell as the cold
weather set in, in March of 1632, the Swedish army emerged in winter quarters,
numbering 40,000, including German allies.
The target was Bavaria one of the wealthiest and strongest principalities on the
Catholic side, it was hopes that by knocking Bavaria out of the war,
it would force the emperor as, uh, the negotiating table on Protestant terms.
If it didn't work well, Bavaria was close to Vienna.
The Austrian capital where the holy Roman Em's court was and then marched.
Then next in April, the SWS were situated across the river,
lack from a reconstructed Imperial army under till the only obstacle between
them and the Arian Heartland on the 15th of a Broga star designed to force
crossing, military engineers built a pontoon bridge across the river,
under fire from Imperial guts. Once again, however,
the Swedish artillery proved its superiority.
As they were able to successfully cover the infantry as they crossed and
supported them as they stormed the Imperial position.
Soon after crossing the decisive moment came when,
til he was shot in the leg during the assault and was evacuated from the field
without their general, the morale of the Imperial army collapsed.
And they treated in a quirk of faith.
The loss of till probably saved the army from being annihilated as it had been
bright and Feld since Gustavos was in the process of encircling the Imperials,
but hadn't managed to close the noose before the enemy fled till died.
Two weeks after the battle, after his wound became infected,
Southern BVA was now completely open to the Swedish army and they marched
unopposed capturing town after town. Some of the larger cities,
such as Munich and Augsburg were only occupied.
If they managed to pay a ransom at large sum of gold to support their Protestant
occupies,
but the smaller cities and towns weren't so lucky and were put to the torch,
their inhabitants killed or imprisoned such was the ugliness of a war of
religion.
This kind of conduct occurred throughout the 30 years are on both sides and
estimated 8 million people died during the war from disease famine,
a bloodshed.
The death of the count of till had left the Imperial army leaderless and the REM
paging Swedish army was increasingly alarming to emperor afer.
He was forced to recall to command a man. He knew likes nor trusted,
but who he felt was the only man who could match Gustavos do on the field of
battle. AACH VA Valenstein was a celebrated general from earlier in the war.
And he was directly responsible for knocking Denmark out of the conflict and had
been rewarded handsomely for his military victories,
but his accumulation of personal power in his ambition for more alarms,
the emperor who saw him as a threat to his own authority in September 16th,
30 while,
and Stein had been dismissed command and had retired to his estate in Silesia.
Now is back charged with raising a new army and stopping the Swedish king Stein
had been paying attention to the way the Gustavos ALS went about the business of
warfare and in the new Imperial army, he put together,
he implemented some of the Swedish reforms to military organization.
Einstein was popular among the common was able to quickly raise a new army and
take to the field.
Suddenly Gustava has found himself outnumbered rather than risk a battle.
He retreated to the city of Nurenberg, which Boen Stein, besiege,
hoping to starve the SWS out for three months.
It was a STLE mate until Gustavos was forced to retreat out of aria,
into Saxony, having lost half his army to disease and starvation.
The Imperials hadn't failed much better and were unable to pursue for some time
For months while Stein and Augustas had been circling each other with their
armies, but neither had been able to entice the other into a decisive battle.
November was late in the campaign season.
The Iberia army was preparing to go into their winter quarters and Saxony Gustav
ALS was shaving at his forced retreat at the hands of his opponents and wanted
one more crack at violence dying before the weather made further movement in
possible.
The SWS marched out of camp and headed towards the last known position of the
enemy.
A hoping to take the Imperials by surprise in their hast V left the haunted
three pound cannons in camp.
The attempted surprise attack failed when the Swedish army ran into Imperial
rear guard station five kilometers south of the town of Luzon.
This skirmish delayed the Swedish advance by several allowers and alerted one
Instein to the danger, allowing him to recall his disparate forces Feld.
Then the meters were a couple of kilometers apart preparing for a fight the next
day, according to the Gregorian calendar, which is what we used today,
the next day was the 16th of November, 1632.
The Swed still used the old Julian calendar.
So to them it was the sick of November. Whatever the date was,
it dawned extremely foggy making its hard to see both armies were about equal
strength out 20,000 men.
Each Wallen Stein's army was deployed along the Lutsen leig road in a defensive
position complete with trenches.
The Swedes were in position to assault this line by 11:00 AM.
Gustav led his troops into battle.
As he always did riding a magnificent Warhorse named strife.
He had been shot in the shoulder by a Polish musketeer in 1627,
and the ball ever been removed. The old injury,
reduced his arm ability and prevented him from wearing the Bulletproof steel
Kiras or breast plates that was typically worn by officer of this period.
The battle started off well for the Swedes as they attacked the Imperial left
flank, which was weak. They were met by a cavalry charge led by Gottfried zoo.
Papen Heim, the Imperial second demand.
They repulsed the but Papen Heim was shot by a cannibal and killed.
This caused the counteract collapse.
Seeing an opening Gustava dolphins put together a cavalry attack of his own.
The confused LA around the left flank of the Imperial battle line only got
worse. When the King's cavalry charge hit was round 1:00 PM two hours into the
engagement. When Gustava sustained his first wound,
a must shot that hit him in the left arm,
crushing it around the same time his horse was hit in the neck,
making it very hard to control the fog and smoke swelled around the field.
And in the confusion,
the king rode behind enemy lines and was attacked by a squadron of Imperial
cavalry.
He was shot again in the back as well as suffering cuts from sword thrusts and
he fell off his horse. He was shot a final time in the temple and it killed him.
He was 37 years old.
No one knew what had happened to the king for hours during a blow in battle.
His horse was spotted wandering around between the lines.
RALS the momentum of the battle stalled as a search was commenced.
Gustav's body was found soon after it had been partially stripped to of his
outer clothes and jewelry and left to avoid destroying the morale of the army.
The King's body was removed from the field in secret Bernhard, OFS,
SACS Vira German prince,
who was the second in command for the Protestant forces,
took command of the army after being told of the King's death.
And the fight continued. The brutal battle finished around nightfall.
When the Swedes took the Imperial artillery battery and turned the guns on their
former owners compelling while Instein to retreat,
to live Zi and leave the field to the Swedes.
It was the definition of per victory for Sweden. They had won the day,
but at horrific cost, not only had they suffered 10,000 casualties,
but the loss of baking was to prove fatal to the Swedish expedition though,
they would remain at war with the empire.
They would no longer assume a leading role in the coalition. Instead,
France seeing the Swedish momentum stall decided to intervene directly in the
war and thereafter,
the war became less about religion and more about the ancestral rivalry between
the French house of Bo Bon of the Austrian and Spanish houses of Habsburg.
It took almost two years to kink Gustav's body to be returned to Sweden and
buried in Stockholm.
He was accompanied by his horse STR who was staffed after his death and is still
displayed dead at the Royal armor in Stockholm.
His death left the throne of Sweden to his five year old daughter, Christina,
who would later go on to convert to Catholicism,
AB cater crown and lived the rest of her life in Rome as the guest of the Pope,
none of which was likely to have made her father happy as VA's opponents
Alberton Valenstein.
He was destined not to outlive Savvis for long and preferred an anti
assassinated in 1634,
after a report surface that the general was preparing to defect the Protestants.
The piece of west failure finally ended the 30 years war in 1648 and
was considered a major victory for the Protestant powers.
The treaties guaranteed the freedom of each state within the holy Roman empire
to choose their own religion and also guaranteed the right of all citizens to
practice their religion in private,
even if it was different from the state religion, where they lived,
it was also a recognition of Sweden as one of the great military power hours of
Europe,
granting territory in Pomerania and SPER and the holy remin empire projecting
its influence over most of Northern Germany,
indeed for the rest of the 17th century,
the Swedish empire was considered one of the most powerful on the Conson even
establishing their own colony in the new world.
New Sweden located on the site of the modern day city of Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania though the age of the Swedish empire,
a only lasted for about a century.
The ideas put forward by Gustav ALS lasted much longer.
His military tactics and organizational style was studied and copied by generals
the generations after his death in particular by Napoleon Bonna party used
Gustav's theory of superior fire power to conquer most a continental Europe.
What's more,
he left a legacy as being a staunched defender of the Protestant religion.
And because of his efforts,
the idea that an individual was able to choose their own religious belief and
practice it without interference from the government remains an integral part of
most modern countries though, he has been dead for almost 400 years.
Gustav ALS continues to cast along shadow the human incarnation of the German
legend of the line of the north. So I really hope you this video,
thank you to Squarespace for sponsoring it.
Please also consider pressing that like button below subscribing to this channel
and thank you for watching.